So we've seen how JavaScript,
the engine, is wrapping our
executing code in execution context.
But there's an important aspect,
one of those weirder parts of JavaScript,
that we need to understand.
And to understand itm we just
need to dig a bit more into what
the JavaScript engine does to
create an execution context.
So, this is the execution context,
Creation and Hoisting.
To start with, let's look at
a phenomenon that happens in JavaScript
that people find surprising,
and perhaps a bit confusing.
I have my simple variable here,
a, and my function b.
I'm gonna actually put a line of code in
here just so the function does something.
I'm gonna use console.log.
This writes to that console tool window
in the dev tools in the browser, if you
haven't used this before, we'll be using
this an awful lot throughout this course.
It's just going to output whatever we
put in here out to that DevTools window.
So when we see Called b,
we'll know that we called this function.
Now, if I was to call the b function,
if I was to invoke it, to execute it,
you would normally think I would do this.
And I can console.log a after that.
So what would you expect to see?
Well I would expect to see called b and
then Hello World.
All right, so let's go ahead and
execute this.
We'll run it in the browser.
Hit f12 from my dev tools, and
look, exactly what we expected.
Now let's do something a little different,
that in other programing languages
you would expect to not work, at all.
I'll go ahead and go back to brackets,
and I'm going to move these calls where I
invoke the b function, and where I output
the value of a to the top of the page.
I'll save this.
Now what would you expect to have happen?
Well, in most programming languages,
you would expect an error because
programming languages execute
their code one line at a time, and
since we haven't gotten to the b function,
I can't use it yet.
That's what you'd normally expect.
But JavaScript doesn't like that.
When I go back and refresh this page to
rerun the JavaScript, look what happens.
It ran the function, and
instead of throwing an error,
It gave me a value but
not the hello world value that I saved.
But this thing called undefined.
So even though the function was below
where it was executed, it still ran.
And in fact this a variable
was available to me
even though it wasn't the proper value.
Watch what happens if I
just remove it outright.
So I'm trying to console .log(a) and
I do not have it declared
as a variable anywhere.
Now, I actually get
an error a is not defined.
But if I put it back, so
that somewhere on this
JavaScript file I have
that a variable declared,
instead of an error, I get a value,
the phrase undefined.
This phenomenon is called hoisting, but
the way it's explained, I think,
can give you the wrong impression.
The way, if you look online, that hoisting
is explained is that people saying well,
that variables and
functions in JavaScript are hoisted or
moved to the top by the JavaScript
engine as if they were
moved physically up to the top so that
they work no matter where you put them.
But we can tell that that's not quite
right because a wasn't set to Hello World.
So it wasn't like this was, the line
was physically moved, it behaves a bit
more like this as if I had a variable
declare and then set the value later.
But still, that's really not what's
happening because we already said what's
executing isn't what you've written, it's
being translated by the JavaScript engine.
So it's not like the JavaScript engine is
physically moving the code that you've
typed around and then executed it.
So let's undo all this.
Here's the code that we wrote.
To understand What JavaScript is doing,
we just need to dig a little bit deeper
into the execution context and
how it's created.
The reason JavaScript behaves the way
is does, the variables and functions
are to some degree available even though
they're written later in the code,
is because the execution context
is created In two phases.
The first phase is called
the creation phase.
In that phase we know we have the global
object which is set up within memory.
We have this which is
set up in the memory.
And again the global object only referring
when we're dealing with
the global execution context.
We'll see other execution context later.
But this is always created
inside an execution context.
There's an outer environment that's
created, and in that creation phase,
as the parser runs through your code and
begins to set up what you've written for
translation It
recognizes where you've created variables
and where you've created functions.
And so it sets up in this creation phase,
the memory space for
the variables and functions.
And it's that step that is somewhat
confusingly called hoisting.
It's not actually moving
code to the top of the page.
All this means is that before your code
begins to be executed line by line,
the JavaScript engine has already
set aside memory space for
the variables that you've created in
that entire code that you've built,
and all of the functions
that you've created as well.
So those functions and
those variables exist in memory.
So when the code begins to execute
line by line, it can access them.
However, when it comes to variables,
it's a little bit different.
You see the function in its entirety
is placed into memory space, meaning
that the function, its name and the code
inside the function is being executed.
However the next phase,
the execution phase which
we'll talk about in a moment where it
actually executes your code line by line,
that's when these kind of assignments
are set, where a equals something.
So the JavaScript engine when it sets
up the memory space for a, it doesn't
know what its value will ultimately end up
being until it starts executing its code.
So instead,
it puts a placeholder called undefined.
That placeholder means oh,
I don't know what this value is yet.
It's the same placeholder that we would
have, if we never said it at all.
All variables in JavaScript
are initially set to undefined,
and functions are sitting in
memory in their entirety.
That's why it's actually a bad idea
to rely on hoisting in any way.
You could run into trouble
when you realize that
value is actually undefined, and
not the value you're expecting.
So while this technically kind of works,
it's better
to always do this, so
that you don't get caught up in that trap.
Now that said, we understand that
when we're talking about hoisting,
when we're talking about this scenario
where I can call the function even though
it's declared later really has to do with
the fact that what I wrote is not
what's directly being executed but
the JavaScript engine Is then taking
my code and making decisions.
In this first phase of creating the
execution context the wrapper around my
code being executed,
it's going to set up the memory space for
the functions and
the variables that it sees
that are going to be used when
it starts executing the code.
And therefore,
we have access to them in a limited way
before they actually physically appear on
the page inside that lexical environment.
Kinda weird right?
But not so much when you understand
that it's just phase one,
I'm gonna set up the memory space.
So when the code begins executing,
those things are actually
already sitting in memory.
Because it looked at your code and
already preset things up to be ready for
the code to start executing.